

COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS II
EX 702
Lecture : 3 Year : IV
Tutorial : 0 Part : I
Practical : 1.5
Course Objectives:
To introduce the student to the principles and building blocks of digital
communication systems and effects of noise on the performance of
communication systems.
1. Introduction (3 hours)
1.1. Digital communication sources, transmitters, transmission channels
and receivers.
1.2. Noise, distortion and interference. Fundamental limitations due to
noise, distortion and interference
1.3. Source coding, coding efficiency, Shannon-Fano and Huffman codes,
coding of continuous time signals (A/D conversion)
2. Sampling Theory (4 hours)
2.1. Nyquist-Kotelnikov sampling theorem for strictly band-limited
continuous time signals, time domain and frequency domain analysis,
spectrum of sampled signal, reconstruction of sampled signal
2.2. Ideal, flat-top and natural sampling processes, sampling of band-pass
signals, sub-sampling theory
2.3. Practical considerations: non-ideal sampling pulses (aperture effect),
non-ideal reconstruction filter and time-limitness of the signal to be
sampled (aliasing effects)
3. Pulse Modulation Systems (8 hours)
3.1. Pulse Amplitude Modulation (PAM), generation, bandwidth
requirements, spectrum, reconstruction methods, time division
multiplexing
3.2. Pulse position and pulse width modulations, generation, bandwidth
requirements
3.3. Pulse code modulation as the result of analog to digital conversion,
uniform quantization.
3.4. Quantization noise, signal to quantization noise ratio in uniform
quantization.
3.5. Non uniform quantization, improvement in average SQNR for signals
with high crest factor, companding techniques (µ and A law
companding)
3.6. Time Division Multiplexing with PCM, data rate and bandwidth of a
PCM signal. The T1 and E1 TDM PCM telephone hierarchy
3.7. Differential PCM, encoder, decoder
3.8. Delta Modulation, encoder, decoder, noises in DM, SQNR.
Comparison between PCM and DM
3.9. Parametric speech coding, vocoders
4. Baseband Data Communication Systems (7 hours)
4.1. Introduction to information theory, measure of information, entropy,
symbol rates and data (bit) rates.
4.2. Shannon Hartley Channel capacity theorem. Implications of the
theorem and theoretical limits.
4.3. Electrical representation of binary data (line codes), Unipolar NRZ,
bipolar NRZ, unipolar RZ, bipolar RZ, Manchester (split phase),
differential (binary RZ-alternate mark inversion) codes, properties,
comparisons
4.4. Baseband data communication systems, Inter-symbol interference
(ISI), pulse shaping (Nyquist, Raised- cosine) and bandwidth
considerations
4.5. Correlative coding techniques, duobinary and modified duobinary
encoders
4.6. M-ary signaling, comparison with binary signaling
4.7. The eye diagram.
5. Bandpass (modulated) data communication systems (4 hours)
5.1. Binary digital modulations, ASK, FSK, PSK, DPSK, QPSK, GMPSK,
implementation, properties and comparisons
5.2. M-ary data communication systems, quadrature amplitude
modulation systems, four phase PSK systems
5.3. Demodulation of binary digital modulated signals (coherent and noncoherent)
5.4. Modems and its applications.
6. Random signals and noise in communication systems (7 hours)
6.1. Random variables and processes, random signals, statistical and time
averaged moments, interpretation of time averaged moments of a
random process stationary process, ergodic process, psdf and AC
function of a ergodic random process
6.2. White noise, thermal noise, band-limited white noise, the psdf and
AC function of white noise
6.3. Passage of wide-sense stationary random signals through a LTI
6.4. Ideal low-pass and RC filtering of white noise, noise equivalent
bandwidth of a filter
6.5. Optimum detection of a pulse in additive white noise, the matched
filter. Realization of matched filters (time co-relaters). The matched
filter for a rectangular pulse, ideal LPF and RC filters as matched filters
6.6. Performance limitation of baseband data communications due to
noise, error probabilities in binary and M-ary baseband data
communication.
7. Noise performance of band-pass(modulated) communication systems(8 hours)
7.1. Effect of noise in envelop and synchronous demodulation of DSB-FC
AM, expression for gain parameter (ratio of output SNR to input SNR),
threshold effect in non-linear demodulation of AM
7.2. Gain parameter for demodulations of DSB-SC and SSB using
synchronous demodulators
7.3. Effect of noise (gain parameter) for non-coherent (limiterdiscriminator-envelop
detector) demodulation of FM, threshold effect
in FM. Use of pre-emphasis and de-emphasis circuits in FM.
7.4. Comparison of AM (DSB-FC, DSB-SC, SSB) and FM (Narrow and wide
bands) in terms power efficiency, channel bandwidth and complexity.
7.5. Noise performance of modulated digital systems. Error probabilities
for ASK, FSK, PSK, DPSK with coherent and non-coherent
demodulation.
7.6. Comparison of modulated digital systems in terms of bandwidth
efficiency, power efficiency and complexity.
8. Error control coding techniques 4 hours)
8.1. Basic principles of error control coding, types, basic definitions
(hamming weight, hamming distance, minimum weight), hamming
distance and error control capabilities
8.2. Linear block codes (systematic and non-systematic), generation,
capabilities, syndrome calculation
8.3. Binary cyclic codes (systematic and non-systematic), generation,
capabilities, syndrome calculation.
8.4. Convolutional codes, implementation, code tree, trellis and decoding
algorithms.
Practical:
1. Study of line codes
2. Study of PCM
3. Study of DPCM
4. Study of DM
5. Study of ASK, FSK and PSK
6. Study of eye diagram
References:
1. S. Haykin, Digital communication systems, latest editions
2. Leon Couch, Digital and analog communication systems, latest edition
3. B.P.Lathi, Analog and Digital communication systems, latest edition
4. J. Proakis, Digital communication systems, latest edition
5. D. Sharma, Course manual “Communication Systems II”.
Evaluation Scheme:
The questions will cover all the units of the syllabus. The evaluation scheme will
be as indicated below:
* There may be minor deviation in marks distribution.
Chapter Hours Marks
Distribution*
1 3 5
2 4 8
3 8 14
4 7 12
5 4 8
6 7 12
7 8 14
8 4 7
Total 45 80

