PROPAGATION AND ANTENNA
EX ……
Lecture : 3 Year : III
Tutorial : 1 Part : II
Practical : 3/2
Course Objectives:
To provide the student with an understanding of antennas, EM wave
propagation and optical fibre communications.
1. Radiation and Antenna Fundamentals (6 hours)
1.1. Retarded Potentials: EM wave generation with a conduction current,
the short uniform current dipole, the radiated electric and magnetic
fields.
1.2. Radiation patterns and input impedance of the short uniform current
dipole, the short Dipole and long dipole.
1.3. Antenna theorems: reciprocity, superposition, Thevenin, minimum
power transfer, Compensation, equality of directional patterns,
equivalence of receiving and Transmitting impedances.
2. Antenna Parameters and Arrays: (6 hours)
2.1. Basic antenna parameters
2.2. Pattern multiplication: Linear and two‐dimensional antenna arrays,
end fire and Broadside arrays.
3. Antennas classification: (10 hours)
3.1. Isotropic antenna
3.2. Omni directional antenna; Dipole
3.3. Directional antennas;
3.4. Travelling wave antennas – single wire, V and Rhombus Reflector
antennas – large plane sheet, small plane sheet, linear, corner,
parabolic, elliptical, hyperbolic and circular reflector. Aperture
antenna ‐ horn Array antennas – Yagi‐Uda, Log Periodic Other
antennas – Monopole, Loop, Helical, Microstrip.
4. Propagation and Radio Frequency Spectrum (6 hours)
4.1. Ground or surface wave
4.2. Space wave; direct and ground reflected wave, duct propagation
4.3. Ionospheric or sky wave; critical frequency, MUF, Skip distance
4.4. Tropospheric wave
4.5. Radio frequency spectrum and its propagation characteristics
5. Propagation between Antennas: (6 hours)
5.1. Free space propagation: power density of the receiving antenna, path
loss
5.2. Plane earth propagation: the ground reflection, effective antenna
heights, the two ray
5.3. propagation model, path loss
5.4. Fresnel Zones and Knife edge diffraction
6. Optical fibres (Introductory) (11 hours)
6.1. Optical fibre communication system and its advantages and
disadvantages over Metalled wire communication system
6.2. Types of optical fibre and its structural difference
6.3. Light propagation characteristics and Numerical Aperture (NA) in
optical fibre
6.4. Losses
6.5. Light source and photo detector
Practical:
1. Two Experiments in properties of EM waves: refraction, diffraction,
polarization
2. Two Experiments in radiation patters of various types of antennas
3. Two Experiments in measurements on optical fibre transmission systems
References:
1. J. D. Kraus, “Antenna” McGraw Hill
2. C. A. Balanis, “ Antenna Theory Analysis and Design” John Wiley & Sons,
Inc.
3. Collins, R. E., “Antenna and Radio Wave Propagation” McGraw Hill.
4. Gerd Kaiser “Optical Fibre Communications” McGraw Hill.
5. John Gowar “ Optical Communication Systems” PHI Publications.
Evaluation Scheme:
The questions will cover all the chapters of the syllabus. The evaluation scheme
will be as indicated in the table below.
Evaluation Schedules:
Unit Hours Questions
1 6 1.5
2 6 1.5
3 10 2.5
4 6 1.5
5 6 1.5
6 11 2.5
Total 45 11
*There may be minor deviation in marks distribution